
Session Title: Developing the Technology-integrated Assessment Scale

Format: Options: 20-min Session

Session Type: Research

Keywords:  assessment, technology-integrated assessment, scale development, higher education

Site of Session Requested: Victoria & Online

Review Type:

One-way Blind
<!--
Options: (1) Double-Blind, (2) One-Way Blind, or (3) Open
Default is double-blind; however, one-way blind, or open review may be requested especially where anonymity is not possible (e.g., media). For any media not ready at the time of submission, another review round will take place once it is ready prior to the conference

-->
Abstract (150-200 words) – To be entered directly into online submission form, not here.

This presentation will highlight the process of building and testing a new scale intended to help researchers understand the Technology-integrated Assessment Framework (TIAF) and how it functions in higher education. In 2024, we published a description of the development of the TIAF [@madland2024], highlighting four factors related to technology-integrated assessment: (1) assessment purposes, (2) the duty of care owed by instructors to learners, (3) factors influencing technology acceptance, and (4) assessment design. Our current work is focused on understanding how these four factors within the TIAF framework can be operationalized. We will share our process of designing the scale, including defining the key constructs, identifying parameters, and framing parameters as items on the scale. We will also share preliminary results from our pilot study using the first draft of the scale. This session will be of interest to undergraduate and graduate students as well as researchers, faculty members, and administrators seeking to refresh their skills in scale development and anyone interested in assessment in higher education.

<!--
The proposal summary for this section is not required if an optional proceeding is submitted at the same time. Reviewers will use the proposal summary provided here *OR* the proceedings file, but not both. Proceedings can be added onto an accepted submission for review at any time as we have an open-door policy, including for retro years. 
-->

Proposal Summary (200 to 500 words, not including references or appendices):

The technology-integrated assessment framework (TIAF) [@madland2024] highlights four key constructs associated with assessing learning with technology:  (1) the purposes of assessment, (2) the duty of care owed to learners, (3) technology acceptance, and (4) assessment design considerations. The TIAF has not yet been tested empirically, and this presentation will describe the process the research team undertook to develop the Technology-integrated Assessment Scale (TIAS) to gather and analyze data related to the structure of the framework.

The TIAF was initially developed as a component of the first presenter's PhD dissertation which was published in the OTESSA Journal (Vol. 4 Iss. 1). Work has continued around the development of a scale to be used initially to analyze the factor structure of the framework, and in the future as a diagnostic scale for higher education institutions and instructors to examine their assessment practices.

Presenters will describe each stage of the process of building the scale beginning with specifying the constructs, generating lists of key descriptors,  turning the descriptors into items, refining the items, and ensuring sufficient content validity to allow us to engage in exploratory factor analysis. Presenters will share how we used pre-existing relevant scales in the extant literature to inform or incorporate into the TIAS. We will then present the results of the preliminary testing of the scale in a pilot study. 

This presentation will be of particular interest to graduate students at the beginning of their programs and who are in the process of envisioning their quantitative or mixed research projects or undergraduate students planning an honours thesis. In addition, we invite researchers, faculty members, and administrators seeking to refresh their skills in scale development and anyone interested in assessment in higher education.


<!-- Assessing learning in higher education is a foundational task, allowing instructors and institutions to (1) certify to other stakeholders that learners have met the required outcomes for a course of study; (2) encourage deep and meaningful learning and study processes; and, (3) build capacity for learners to evaluate their own work and become self-sufficient lifelong learners. These interdependent purposes of assessment reflect the complexity of the task of coming to know what learners know. The purposes of assessment are complicated by the growing pressures on higher education instructors to ensure that assessment practices do not harm learners who are increasingly experiencing mental health challenges that impact their ability to learn and to demonstrate their learning through conventional methods (e.g. high-stakes exams). Furthermore, there are forces external to higher education that push institutions to integrate technology into curricula.  -->

<!-- The proposal summary for this section is not required if an optional proceeding is submitted at the same time. Reviewers will use the proposal summary provided here *OR* the proceedings file, but not both. Proceedings can be added onto an accepted submission for review at any time as we have an open-door policy, including for retro years. -->

Statement of Engagement (up to 200 words):

At each stage as the presentation progresses, presenters will lead participants to engage in a high-level process of specifying a construct, identifying key factors, and transforming those factors into potential items for a scale. Audience questions will be encouraged throughout.

<!-- For statement of engagement, please summarize how you plan to use the time slot you have requested. If there is more than one facilitator, identify their roles. We encourage planning for interactivity with the audience in person or online (e.g., breakout rooms, editable documents). We also encourage engagement of the open community who is not registered in the conference (e.g., sharing via social media at the conference hashtag, open access to resources). -->